---
layout: post
title: "Report on LAK 2017"
date: 2017-04-05
---

In this post, I have collected the 10 most interesting papers when attending the [7th International Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) Conference](http://lak17.solaresearch.org/) - my second time at LAK. The theme for LAK'17 was put on **the transdisciplinary nature of research in learning analytics**. Under the theme, there were 36 papers accepted for long presentation, 22 for short presentation and 45 for the poster session. The proceedings are [available online](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027385&picked=prox&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751), and [here](http://ariadne.cti.espol.edu.ec/xavier/lak17/) you can have a look at the visualizations of different aspects of the conference. These papers cover a wide range of topics including multimodal data (e.g., data collected from sensors indicating students' physical conditions during learning) analytics, discourse analytics, learning design, self-regulated learning,  learning analytics ethics and policies, etc. Among these topics, much attention was paid to the usage of multimodal data for modeling students' learning process. This was reflected in that 2 out of 3 keynotes along with 11 papers (19%) were around this topic. Another aspect of LAK'17 we should notice is that there is an emerging interest in the research on learning discourse analytics, which accounts for a total of 12 papers (21%) investigating topics ranging from analyzing the dynamics (e.g., post content) in MOOC forum to detecting learners' reflective evidence in writing assignments. 

The following list is only based on the long and short papers. Here it is:

1. [Detecting Changes in Student Behavior from Clickstream Data](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027430&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) **[Best Paper Nominee]** More often than not, we observe that learners would change their behavior (e.g., requesting more or less course content) at certain points during taking courses. **But when and why?** This work aims to develop a statistical method to detect when learners change their previewing and reviewing behavior in courses and investigate how these changes are related to other aspects of learners’ activity.

2. [Put Your Thinking Cap On: Detecting Cognitive Load using EEG during Learning](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027431&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) **How can we detect learners' metal efforts?** This work takes an initial step towards this goal: using EEG sensors to detect learners' cognitive load during learning and further analyzing its' relationship with task difficulty.

3. [Improving Learning through Achievement Priming in Crowdsourced Information Finding Microtasks](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027402&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) In the setting of crowdsourcing, online workers often fail to learn how to complete tasks effectively and drop out early in large batches of tasks. To help crowdsourcing workers, this work proposes a method based on achievement priming to engage workers and improve their learning in crowdsourced information finding tasks. This paper gives a good example of how to conduct solid research by connecting two trendy topics, i.e., online learning and online labor.

4. [Reflective Writing Analytics for Actionable Feedback](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027436&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) **[Best Paper Award]** In certain contexts, reflective writing serves as a good way for students to learn better. To exert the power of reflective writing, this work designs and implements a platform, which automatically captures the evidence of students' reflective behavior from their writing assignments and provides high-quality and actionable feedback back to the students. Two major contributions from this work are 1) a new conceptual framework for reflective writing and 2) a computational approach to model reflective writing, derive analytics, and provide feedback.

5. [Learning Pulse: a machine learning approach for predicting performance in self-regulated learning using multimodal data](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027447&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) This work is one of the good examples from LAK'17 demonstrating how to incorporate multimodal data (i.e., heart rate, step count, weather condition and learning activity) to predict learning performance in the setting of self-regulated learning. It mainly contributes to the research on multimodal data analytics by developing a software infrastructure to collect and process multimodal data related to learning.

6. [Building a Transcript of the Future](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027418&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) Nowadays, our academic transcript is usually in the form of a list of courses along with the grades we earn and the final GPA score. It that complete and detailed enough to display our competence? **If not, how can we enrich our academic transcript?** This work develops several analytic methods to enrich elements of individual transcripts with contextual information from their peers (e.g., did the individual stand out from their peers?).  By doing this, measures of students' learning performance and intellectual breadth can be hopefully improved.

7. [Developing a MOOC experimentation platform: Insights from a user study](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027398&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) If you are a MOOC instructor who wants to get a better understanding of your students based on their traces left on the MOOC platform, you may fail to do so because usually analyzing the vast amounts of MOOC data and getting in-depth insights are time-consuming, labor-intensive and require advanced technical skills. This work focuses on setting MOOC instructors free by building a user-friendly platform named **MOOCito**, which can automatically: 1) incrementally import data from cloud storage, 2) calculate indicators specifying students' course engagement, 3) identify student groups with different characteristics, 4) provide interventions (e.g., send emails) to students, and 5) conduct follow-up analysis after intervention.

8. [Sequencing Content in an Adaptive Testing System: The Role of Choice](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027412&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) It has been proved that students' choice of learning content would largely affect their outcome measurements (e.g., engagement). This work pushes the research work forward by investigating the effect of student choice on assignment completion and future achievement in **Intelligent Tutoring Systems**. This work motivates me to think about the question - to what extent should we allow students to decide what to learn in the next step in MOOCs?

9. [Expanding the scope of learning analytics data: preliminary findings on attention and self-regulation using wearable technology](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027427&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) Have you thought about that your attention and self-regulation during learning actually can be reflected by the variability of your heart rate? This work details the research results from answering this question.

10. [From prediction to impact: Evaluation of a learning analytics retention program](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3027405&CFID=847772281&CFTOKEN=16235751) Few studies have examined the impact of the implemented intervention strategies on learners' retention. To fill the gap, this work evaluates the impact of a retention program, which provides learning and remediation support to at-risk learners. Although the results indicate that the intervention has no effect on the retention outcomes, this work still provides some insights into how to develop more effective interventions.